Whole Tale (WT) Astro Working Group Call

Friday, Jan 25, 2pm ET (1pm CT noon MT, 11am PT)
Google Meet
- Go to: meet.google.com/upv-boyj-xcs
- Dial in option: ‎(‪US‬) ‪+1 865-888-0630‬ PIN: ‪525 956 013#‬

AGENDA

1. WT Updates 
2. Cheryl Thompson & WT fellowship project idea
3. Discussion on reproducibility
4. Demo

Attendees: Matt, Cheryl, Britton, Gus

Notes: 
* See slides: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1UtwzrvchVp_8hrxlbo3OUNNqnT-wxrA7yc9GJYLE_n8/edit?usp=sharing
* Matt gave an update on where the WT project is and recap on the working group work (see slides)
* Citation and provenance issues
* Tale needs technical and nontechnical
*   Non-technical is a lot of work with getting data in usable format, running different algorithms and processes - going back and forth a bit, geographic location of data vs. researcher
*   Provenance is really important
*   Narrative of what happened to make sense of it - lots need to know to reproduce the work
* Concern about reproducibility as wanting perfection
      Good enough - not perfect but enough to understand what they did
* Rerunning codes and scripts is a big pressing problem
* Access to data and code - openSky gives credibility; lots of barriers to releasing their own data sets
* Soft mandates on data access and sharing
* Transparency - who does it, how to make it more transparent
* Simulation work
    Methods written as software - what they do with it, needs to be tracked but changes over time
*   Chemistry software apps - hard to implement, small changes have profound impacts, codes are rarely made available; unwilling to make it available (Britton’s work)
* Observational side - Gus’s work attacking unshared chemistry results and related. Making large amounts of data available - how to make them available and release the code
    * Focus on data and data objects rather than code
    * Partner with archivists - observational data and a French repository so can figure out
    * VAMC - figure out what they want to archive data
    * Data formats that it accepts; problems with provenance trace and repository have what they want
    * Gus has had to learn more archiving perspective and data science
    * How it will be reused
    * Need to identify whether experts can assume or guess what was used. Need to understand the software and packages/libraries needed to rerun. Is this from this Toolkit?
    * Tacit knowledge with analyses and software
    * Stack of data formats (data levels and data interview with author) -  can recognize formats and know how to deal with it
    * Tend to extract high-level data products - astronomy has ways to go back to the raw bits. We’re not good at asking for authors for intermediary data products - they got data from this source and here is my end product but don’t focus on the middle stages
* Suggested projects to look at - 
    * Gus: Exemplar but not sure. Starry paper that Gus did and used many different narrative forms to augment what a paper is. Unpacked all the bits of the article and just published. Lots of discussion on Twitter on data and software citation. Preprint process had problems
    * Millennium simulation - first attempt to make data products available to astro community for more research. Made a bunch of catalogs and didn’t put up raw data. People made relational databases and still papers being published from it. Inspired other projects like RSL. Wait time is less than Millennium (joke) - its less popular. OWLS to EAGLES to ILLUSTRATIOUS (MIT) to RSL - have made part of all their data available with varying time delay
* Didn't do demo due to time so maybe do next call

Next steps with working group:
    Series of group calls - WT demo (interest in the demo) and what I’m learning

